18

1.6.2

1.6.3

1.6.4

1.6.5

CHAPTER 1  What is the intelligent web?

Fallacy #2: Inference happens instantaneously
Computing a solution takes time, and the responsiveness of your application may be 
crucial  for  the  financial  success  of  your  business.  You  shouldn’t  assume  that  all 
algorithms, on  all  datasets,  will  run  within  the  response  time  limits  of  your  applica-
tion.  You  should  test  the  performance  of  your  algorithm  within  the  range  of  your 
operating characteristics.

Fallacy #3: The size of data doesn’t matter
When we talk about intelligent applications, size does matter! The size of your data
comes into the picture in two ways. The first is related to the responsiveness of the 
application as mentioned in fallacy #2. The second is related to your ability to obtain 
meaningful results on a large dataset. You may be able to provide excellent movie or 
music recommendations for a set of users when the number of users is around 100, 
but  the  same  algorithm  may  result  in  poor  recommendations  when  the  number  of 
users involved is around 100,000. 

 Conversely, in some cases, the more data you have, the more intelligent your appli-
cation can be. Thus, the size of the data matters in more than one way and you should 
always ask: Do I have enough data? What’s the impact to the quality of my intelligent 
application if I must handle 10 times more data?

Fallacy #4: Scalability of the solution isn’t an issue
Another fallacy that’s related to, but distinct from, fallacies #2 and #3 is the assump-
tion  that  an  intelligent  application  solution  can  scale  by  simply  adding  more 
machines. Don’t assume that your solution is scalable. Some algorithms are scalable 
and others aren’t. Let’s say that we’re trying to find groups of similar headline news 
among billions of titles. Not all clustering algorithms (see chapter 4) can run in paral-
lel.  You  should  consider  scalability  during  the  design  phase  of  your  application.  In 
some cases, you may be able to split the data and apply your intelligent algorithm on 
smaller datasets in parallel. The algorithms that you select in your design may have 
parallel  (concurrent)  versions,  but  you  should  investigate  this  from  the  outset, 
because typically, you’ll build a lot of infrastructure and business logic around your 
algorithms.

Fallacy #5: Apply the same good library everywhere
It’s tempting to use the same successful technique many times over to solve diverse 
problems related to the intelligent behavior of your application. Resist that tempta-
tion  at  all  costs!  I’ve  encountered  people  who  were  trying  to  solve  every  problem 
under the sun using the Lucene search engine. If you catch yourself doing something 
like that, remember the expression: When you’re holding a hammer, everything looks 
like a nail. 

 Intelligent application software is like every other piece of software—it has a cer-
tain area of applicability and certain limitations. Make sure that you test thoroughly 

Licensed to Deborah Christiansen <pedbro@gmail.com>

Download at Boykma.Com