156

CHAPTER 4  Clustering: grouping things together

D

E

F
G
H
I

J

If there aren’t enough data points in the epsilon neighborhood of p then it’s either 
noise or a border point. Treat it temporarily as noise and if it’s a border point we’ll 
change its label later. At this stage, no cluster has been created for p.
If the number of data points in the epsilon neighborhood is greater than or equal to 
the minimum number of data points minPoints, we can proceed. But first, we need to 
remove the given data point (p) from its own set of cluster points.
Iterate through all the data points other than p.
Find its epsilon neighborhood and determine whether it’s directly density reachable. 
If it’s a border point, we should assign it to the cluster.
This point isn’t noise but we must examine whether it’s a core point, so we add it to 
the original list to find its epsilon neighborhood, and we assign it to the cluster that we 
examine
Before we continue with the next data point from the neighborhood of p, we remove 
the data point that we just examined
As you might expect from this description, the choice of eps and minPoints is impor-
tant. The best way to identify good values for these two parameters is to experiment 
with your data for some known cluster formations. If you deal with a two-dimensional 
dataset (the data points have two attributes), a reasonable choice for minPoints is 4. 
You can use that value as your starting point and then take a few more values to exam-
ine whether the results of the clustering are improving. The case of multidimensional 
datasets is harder because the properties of multidimensional spaces are quite differ-
ent from those of the lower-dimensional spaces; we’ll discuss that in appendix C. The 
choice of eps will be easier if you can leverage the following factors:

■ Data normalization. You should use normalized data whenever possible, espe-

cially for more than two dimensions. 

■ Availability of statistics about the intrapoint distances.
■ Dataset dimensionality—how many attributes do your data points have?

Provide  an  initial  value  for  eps  such  that  you’d  consider  the  distance  between  two 
points in the set to be “close.” Then create a few increments in geometric progression, 
say, factors of 2 and cluster again. How do the results change as the eps value changes? 
If the results don’t change significantly then you’re done; select the average value as 
your eps. If the results do change, there are two possibilities:
■ The results get better, or worse, as the value increases.
■ The  results  don’t  show  a  consistent  behavior—for  example,  you  double  the 
value of eps and the results get worse; you double it again and the results get 
better!

The  first  case  is  easy.  If  the  clustering  results  are  better  as  the  value  increases  then 
select the maximum value, or keep increasing the value—provided that you have time 
and resources—until you don’t get good results. 

Licensed to Deborah Christiansen <pedbro@gmail.com>

Download at Boykma.Com