xxii

ABOUT THIS BOOK

location that you unzipped the file. You’re now ready to run the BeanShell script as 
described in appendix A.

Author Online
Purchase of Algorithms of the Intelligent Web includes free access to a private web forum 
run  by  Manning  Publications  where  you  can  make  comments  about  the  book,  ask 
technical  questions,  and  receive  help  from  the  authors  and  from  other  users.  To 
access the forum and subscribe to it, point your web browser to www.manning.com/
AlgorithmsoftheIntelligentWeb. This page provides information on how to get on the 
forum once you are registered, what kind of help is available, and the rules of conduct 
on the forum. It also provides links to the source code for the examples in the book, 
errata, and other downloads. 

 Manning’s commitment to our readers is to provide a venue where a meaningful dia-
log between individual readers and between readers and the authors can take place. It 
is not a commitment to any specific amount of participation on the part of the authors, 
whose contribution to the Author Online remains voluntary (and unpaid). We suggest 
you try asking the authors some challenging questions lest their interest stray! 

 The Author Online forum and the archives of previous discussions will be accessi-

ble from the publisher’s website as long as the book is in print.

About the cover illustration
The illustration on the cover of Algorithms of the Intelligent Web is taken from a French 
book  of  dress  customs,  Encyclopedie  des  Voyages  by  J.  G.  St.  Saveur,  published  in  1796. 
Travel  for  pleasure  was  a  relatively  new  phenomenon  at  the  time  and  illustrated 
guides such as this one were popular, introducing both the tourist as well as the arm-
chair traveler to the inhabitants of other far-off regions of the world, as well as to the 
more familiar regional costumes of France and Europe.

  The  diversity  of  the  drawings  in  the  Encyclopedie  des  Voyages  speaks  vividly  of  the 
uniqueness and individuality of the world’s countries and peoples just 200 years ago. 
This was a time when the dress codes of two regions separated by a few dozen miles 
identified people uniquely as belonging to one or the other, and when members of a 
social class or a trade or a tribe could be easily distinguished by what they were wear-
ing. This was also a time when people were fascinated by foreign lands and faraway 
places, even though they could not travel to these exotic destinations themselves.

 Dress codes have changed since then and the diversity by region, so rich at the 
time, has faded away. It is now often hard to tell the inhabitant of one continent from 
another. Perhaps, trying to view it optimistically, we have traded a world of cultural 
and visual diversity for a more varied personal life. Or a more varied and interesting 
intellectual and technical life.

 We at Manning celebrate the inventiveness, the initiative, and the fun of the com-
puter business with book covers based on native and tribal costumes from two centu-
ries ago brought back to life by the pictures from this travel guide. 

Licensed to Deborah Christiansen <pedbro@gmail.com>

Download at Boykma.ComWhat is 
 the intelligent web?

This chapter covers:
■ Leveraging intelligent web applications
■ Using web applications in the real world
■ Building intelligence in your web

So, what’s this book about? First, let’s say what it’s not. This book isn’t about build-
ing a sleek UI, or about using JSON or XPath, or even about RESTful architectures. 
There are several good books for Web 2.0 applications that describe how to deliver 
AJAX-based designs and an overall rich UI experience. There are also many books 
about  other  web-enabling  technologies  such  as  XSL  Transformations  (XSLT)  and 
XML Path Language (XPath), Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG), XForms, XML User 
Interface Language (XUL), and JSON (JavaScript Object Notation). 

  The  starting  point  of  this  book  is  the  observation  that  most  traditional  web 
applications are obtuse, in the sense that the response of the system doesn’t take 
into account the user’s prior input and behavior. We refer not to issues related to 
bad UI but rather to a fixed response of the system to a given input. Our main inter-
est is building web applications that do take into account the input and behavior of 

1

Licensed to Deborah Christiansen <pedbro@gmail.com>

Download at Boykma.Com