An overview of clustering algorithms 

129

algorithm  looking  for  hierarchical  relations  between  the  points  or  simply  dividing 
regions of space into different groups? The second categorization of clustering algo-
rithms  is  based  on  the  type  and  structure  of  the  data.  Some  clustering  algorithms 
perform best on numerical data and others specialize on categorical data. The third 
categorization  is  based  on  whether  the  algorithm  was  built  to  deal  with  large  data-
sets  from  the  outset.  So,  let’s  now  give  an  overview  of  clustering  algorithms  from 
these perspectives.

4.2.1

Clustering algorithms based on cluster structure
Figure 4.3 shows the categorization of the 
various  clustering  algorithms  based  on 
the resulting structure of the clusters. 

Figure 4.3  Categorizing clustering algorithms 
based on cluster structure

 Hierarchical algorithms result in the 
identification  of  clusters  within  clusters. 
A  hierarchical  algorithm  for  news  arti-
cles  could  come  up  with  four  large 
groups that represent broad topics, such 
as politics, sports, business, and technology, and have within each group subgroups; 
for example, inside sports news, you could have basketball news, baseball news, and so 
on.  In  our  example  for  this  section,  a  hierarchical  algorithm  could  divide  users  of 
open  source  projects  into  two  large  groups:  those  who  get  paid  to  participate  and 
those who don’t. It could further break down these two major groups on the basis of 
age or income range. 

 Most hierarchical clustering algorithms admit a threshold parameter that indicates at 
what depth the algorithm should stop seeking smaller subgroups. Aside from being a 
reasonable thing to do with respect to the final structure of the data clusters, these 
parameters  eliminate  a  certain  amount  of  unnecessary  computational  effort.  Of 
course, the final number of clusters isn’t known a priori but depends on the configu-
ration  parameters  of  the  algorithm  that  determine  the  termination  criteria  for  the 
hierarchy of clusters.

  The  category  of  agglomerative  hierarchical  algorithms  follows  a  bottom-up 
approach—starting with individual elements and forming clusters by associating them 
with other elements from the bottom up toward the global (super) cluster. The cate-
gory of divisive hierarchical algorithms follows a top-down approach—it starts with the 
global (super) cluster and proceeds by dividing the data into smaller clusters.

  Partitional  algorithms  create  a  fixed  number  of  clusters.  The  so-called  k-means 
clustering  algorithm  belongs  in  this  category;  we’ll  use  this  algorithm  later  in  the 
chapter. The minimum spanning tree (MST) and the nearest neighbor algorithms also have 
partitional versions. There are two basic approaches within this category: the concep-
tual modeling approach and the iterative optimization approach. Typical representatives 
of the first approach are based on probabilistic models; a typical representative of the 
second approach is the k-means algorithm.

Licensed to Deborah Christiansen <pedbro@gmail.com>

Download at Boykma.Com