128

CHAPTER 4  Clustering: grouping things together

4.2

 You could go back and manipulate the distance that we used so that you achieve 
the desirable effect of excluding Maria from that cluster. If you did that, you’d destroy 
the simplicity of the approach, and in all likelihood, you wouldn’t be able to use the 
algorithm successfully in a different set.

 Deciding what are the “right” clusters for a given set of data is a difficult problem 
to solve and is an area of active research. The two naïve approaches—SQL and array 
sorting—as well as all the algorithms that we’ll present in the following sections have 
certain advantages and disadvantages. In the end, it’s the nature of the data that deter-
mines the success of the algorithms. 

 This isn’t a conclusion that applies specifically to clustering, and you should always 
keep it in mind when designing intelligent applications. Clustering is the hardest case, 
because there’s no direct measure of success that the machine can use. Clusters aren’t 
known a priori; if they were you wouldn’t need a clustering algorithm to begin with! 
This is why clustering belongs in the category of machine learning known as unsuper-
vised learning. 

 The next section will provide an overview of clustering and a categorization of the 
algorithms  based  on  a  number  of  criteria,  such  as  the  resulting  structure  of  the 
clusters, the structure and type of data considered, and the size of the data that need 
to be clustered.

An overview of clustering algorithms 
We presented the SQL approach and sorted arrays as a prelude to clustering so you 
can consider clustering to be a generalization of sorting. Yes, that’s right! When we 
sort a list of objects, in effect, we line up all the objects and use the comparator to pick 
the first object on the line, the second, and so on. As a result of that process, we iden-
tify the immediate neighbors of every object on that line. 

 When we cluster a set of objects, we also identify the immediate neighborhood of 
an object, but our objects can retain their multidimensional nature. They could be 
points on a plane or in 3D space, or they could be points in a more general geometric 
construct depending on the number of attributes that we want to consider and the 
notion of distance that we want to adopt.

 The goal of clustering algorithms is identifying groups in a way that doesn’t suffer 
from the drawbacks of the SQL approach or the simple array-sorting approach, and 
can thus extend to many dimensions and arbitrary object spaces. Members of a cluster 
should be very similar to each other (their neighbors) and very dissimilar to the mem-
bers of any other cluster in the entire set. Clustering is applicable in a wide range of 
problems, ranging from biology and medicine to finance and marketing.

 Clustering algorithms come in a lot of shapes and forms, and it’s difficult to cre-
ate a categorization for them on the basis of a single criterion. For that reason we’ll 
provide  an  overview  of  clustering  algorithms  before  we  proceed  to  specific  imple-
mentations  and  lose  track  of  the  big  picture.  The  first  categorization  of  clustering 
algorithms  that  we  present  is  based  on  the  nature  of  the  cluster  structure.  Is  the 

Licensed to Deborah Christiansen <pedbro@gmail.com>

Download at Boykma.Com