16

CHAPTER 1  What is the intelligent web?

 Artificial intelligence, widely known by its acronym AI, began as a computational field 
around 1950. Initially, the goals of AI were quite ambitious and aimed at developing 
machines  that  can  think  like  humans  (Russell  and  Norvig,  2002;  Buchanan,  2005). 
Over  time,  the  goals  became  more  practical  and  concrete.  Megalomania  yielded  to 
pragmatism  and  that,  in  turn,  gave  birth  to  many  of  the  other  fields  that  we  men-
tioned, such as machine learning, data mining, soft computing, and so on.

 Today, the most advanced system of computational intelligence can’t comprehend 
simple stories that a four-year-old can easily understand. So, if we can’t make comput-
ers “think,” can we make them “learn”? Can we teach a computer to distinguish an 
animal based on its characteristics? How about a bad subprime mortgage application? 
How about something more complicated, such as recognizing your voice and replying 
in your native language—can a computer do that? The answer to these questions is a 
resounding yes. Nevertheless, you may wonder, “What’s all the fuss about?” After all, 
you can always build a huge lookup table and get answers to your questions based on 
the data that you have in your database.

 You can certainly follow the lookup table approach, but there are a few problems 
with  it.  First,  for  any  problem  of  consequence  in  a  real  production  system,  your 
lookup table would be enormous; so, based on efficiency considerations, this isn’t an 
optimal solution. Second, if the question that you form is based on data that doesn’t 
exist in your database, you’d get no answer at all. If a person behaved in that manner, 
you’d be quick to adorn him with adjectives that censorship wouldn’t allow us to print 
on these pages. Last, someone would have to build and maintain your lookup table, 
and the number of these people would grow with the size of your table: a feature that 
may not sit well with the financial department of your organization. So we need some-
thing better than a lookup table.

 Machine learning refers to the capability of a software system to generalize based 
on past experience, and use these generalizations to provide answers to questions that 
relate to data that it has encountered in the past as well as new data that the system has 
never encountered before. Some learning algorithms are transparent to humans—a 
human can follow the reasoning behind the generalization. Examples of transparent 
learning algorithms are decision trees and, more generally, any rule-based learning 
method. Other algorithms, though, aren’t transparent to humans—neural networks 
and support vector machines (SVM) fall in this category.

 Always remember that machine intelligence, like human intelligence, isn’t infalli-
ble.  In  the  world  of  intelligent  applications,  you’ll  learn  to  deal  with  uncertainty 
and fuzziness; just like in the real world, any answer given to you is valid with a certain 
degree of confidence but not with certainty. In our everyday life, we simply assume 
that certain things will happen for sure. For that reason, we’ll address the issues of 
credibility, validity, and the cost of being wrong when we use intelligent applications.

1.6

Eight fallacies of intelligent applications
We’ve covered all the introductory material. By now, you should have a fairly good, 
although  only  high-level,  idea  of  what  intelligent  applications  are  and  how  you’re 

Licensed to Deborah Christiansen <pedbro@gmail.com>

Download at Boykma.Com