2

CHAPTER 1  What is the intelligent web?

every user in the system, over time, as well as any other potentially useful information 
that may be available. 

 Let’s say that you start using a web application to order food, and every Wednesday 
you order fish. You’d have a much better experience if, on Wednesdays, the applica-
tion asked you “Would you like fish today?” instead of “What would you like to order 
today?” In the first case, the application somehow realized that you like fish on Wednes-
days. In the second case, the application remains oblivious to this fact. Thus, the data 
created by your interaction with the site doesn’t affect how the application chooses 
the  content  of  a  page  or  how  it’s  presented.  Asking  a  question  that’s  based  on  the 
user’s prior selections introduces a new kind of interactivity between the website and 
its users. So, we could say that websites with that property have a learning capacity.

 To take this one step further, the interaction of an intelligent web application with 
a user may adjust due to the input of other users that are somehow related to each 
other. If your dietary habits match closely those of John, the application may recom-
mend a few menu selections that are common for John but that you never tried; build-
ing recommendations is covered in chapter 3. 

  Another  example  would  be  a  social  networking  site,  such  as  Facebook,  which 
could offer a fact-checking chat room or electronic forum. By fact checking, we mean 
that  as  you  type  your  message,  there’s  a  background  check  on  what  you  write  to 
ensure that your statements are factually accurate and even consistent with your pre-
vious messages. This functionality is similar to spell-checking, which may be already 
familiar  to  you,  but  rather  than  check  grammar  rules,  it  checks  a  set  of  facts  that 
could  be  general  truths  (“the  Japanese  invasion  of  Manchuria  occurred  in  1931”), 
your own beliefs about a particular subject (“less taxes are good for the economy”), 
or  simple  personal  facts  (“doctor’s  appointment  on  11/11/2008”).  Websites  with 
such functional behavior are inference capable; we describe the design of such func-
tionality in chapter 5. 

 We can argue that the era of intelligent web applications began in earnest with the 
advent  of  web  search  engines  such  as  Google.  You  may  legitimately  wonder:  why 
Google? People knew how to perform information retrieval (search) tasks long before 
Google appeared on the world scene. But search engines such as Google take advan-
tage of the fact that the content on the web is interconnected, and this is extremely 
important. Google’s thesis was that the hyperlinks within web pages form an underly-
ing structure that can be mined to determine the importance of the various pages. In 
chapter 2, we describe in detail the PageRank algorithm that makes this possible.

  By  extending  our  discussion,  we  can  say  that  intelligent  web  applications  are 
designed  from  the  outset  with  a  collaborative  and  interconnected  world  in  mind. 
They’re designed to automatically train so that they can understand the user’s input, 
the user’s behavior, or both, and adjust their response accordingly. The sharing of the 
user profiles among colleagues, friends, and family on social networking sites such as 
MySpace or Facebook, as well as the sharing of content and opinions on newsgroups 
and online forums, create new levels of connectivity that are central to intelligent web 
applications and go beyond plain hyperlinks.

Licensed to Deborah Christiansen <pedbro@gmail.com>

Download at Boykma.Com