78

CHAPTER 3  Creating suggestions and recommendations

similarity metric. Intuitively we expect these two users to be more similar than those 
who listened to a single song and their opinions differed by 3 units (out of 5!). 

 The naïve similarity “squeezes” the similarity values for small distances (because we 
add 1) while leaving large distances (values of the distance much larger than 1) unaf-
fected. What if we add another value? The general form of the naïve similarity is y = 
beta / (beta + x), where beta is our free parameter and x is the Euclidean distance. Fig-
ure 3.3 shows what the naïve similarity would look like for various values, between 1 
and 2, of the parameter beta.

 Keeping in mind the shortcomings of the naïve similarity, let’s look at the first sim-
ilarity definition between two users as shown in listing 3.2, in the case 0 block. If the 
users have some songs in common we divide the sum of their squared differences by 
the number of common songs, take the positive square root, and pass on that value to 
a special function. We’ve seen that function before: it’s the hyperbolic tangent func-
tion. We subtract the value of the hyperbolic tangent from 1, so that our final value of 
similarity ranges between 0 and 1, with zero implying dissimilarity and 1 implying the 
highest  similarity.  Voilà!  We’ve  arrived  at  our  first  definition  of  similarity  of  users 
based on their ratings.

 The second similarity definition that we present in listing 3.2, in the case 1 block, 
improves on the first similarity by taking into account the ratio of the common items ver-
sus the number of all possible common items. That’s a heuristic that intuitively makes 
sense. If I’ve listened to 30 songs and you’ve listened to 20, we could have up to 20 com-
mon songs. Let’s say that we have only 5 songs in common and we agree fairly well on 

Figure 3.3  NaÏve similarity curves as functions of the Euclidean distance

Licensed to Deborah Christiansen <pedbro@gmail.com>

Download at Boykma.Com