Basic elements of intelligent applications

5

requires the ability to discern the meaning of things within a context. It requires the 
ability to automatically process and group together documents, or parts of documents, 
that contain free text in natural (human) language on the basis of whether they’re “sim-
ilar.”  It  requires  some  structured  knowledge  about  the  world  or,  at  least,  about  the 
domain of discourse that the document refers to. It requires the ability to focus on cer-
tain documents that satisfies certain rules (user’s criteria) and do so quickly.

 Thus, we arrive at the conclusion that applications such as Wikipedia or other pub-
lic portals are different from applications such as Google search, Google Ads, Netflix 
Cinematch, and so on. Applications of the first kind are collaborative platforms that 
facilitate the aggregation and maintenance of collective knowledge. Applications of 
the second kind generate abstractions of patterns from a body of collective knowledge 
and therefore generate a new layer of opportunity and value.

 We conclude this section by summarizing the elements that are required in order 

to build an intelligent web application:

■ Aggregated content—In other words, a large amount of data pertinent to a spe-
cific application. The aggregated content is dynamic rather than static, and its 
origins as well as its storage locations could be geographically dispersed. Each 
piece of information is typically associated with, or linked to, many other pieces 
of information.

■ Reference structures—These structures provide one or more structural and seman-
tic interpretations of the content. For example, this is related to what people 
call  folksonomy—the  use  of  tags  for  annotating  content  in  a  dynamic  way  and 
continuously  updating  the  representation  of  the  collective  knowledge  to  the 
users. Reference structures about the world or a specific domain of knowledge 
come  in  three  big  flavors:  dictionaries,  knowledge  bases,  and  ontologies  (see 
the related references at the end). 

■ Algorithms—This refers to a layer of modules that allows the application to har-
ness the information, which is hidden in the data, and use it for the purpose of 
abstraction (generalization), prediction, and (eventually) improved interaction 
with its users. The algorithms are applied on the aggregated content, and some-
times require the presence of reference structures. 

These ingredients, summarized in figure 1.1, 
are essential for characterizing an application 
as  an  intelligent  web  application,  and  we’ll 
refer to them throughout the book as the tri-
angle of intelligence.

  It’s  prudent  to  keep  these  three  compo-
nents  separate  and  build  a  model  of  their 
interaction that best fits your needs. We’ll dis-
cuss  more  about  architecture  design  in  the 
rest of the chapters, especially in chapter 7.

Algorithms
(Thinking)

Content

(Raw Data)

Reference
(Knowledge)

Figure 1.1  The triangle of intelligence:  
the three essential ingredients of intelligent 
applications.

Licensed to Deborah Christiansen <pedbro@gmail.com>

Download at Boykma.Com