Machine learning, data mining, and all that

15

WEB SERVICES
Web services are APIs that facilitate the communication between applications. A large 
number of web services frameworks are available and many of them are open source. 
Apache Axis (http://ws.apache.org/axis/) is an open source implementation of the 
Simple Access Object Protocol (SOAP), which “can be used for exchanging structured 
and typed information between peers in a decentralized, distributed environment.”6
Apache Axis is a popular framework and it was completely redesigned in version 2. 
Apache Axis2 supports SOAP 1.1 and SOAP 1.2 as well as the widely popular REST style 
of web services, and contains a staggering number of features.

  Another  Apache  project  worth  mentioning  is  Apache  CXF  (http://incubator. 
apache.org/cxf/), the result of the merger of Celtix by  IONA and Codehaus  XFire. 
Apache  CXF  supports  the  following  standards:  JAX-WS  2.0,  JAX-WSA,  JSR-181, 
SAAJ, SOAP 1.1, 1.2, WS-I Basic Profile, WS-Security, WS-Addressing, WS-RM, WS-Policy, 
WSDL 1.1 and 2.0. It also supports multiple transport mechanisms, bindings, and for-
mats. If you’re considering using web services, you should have a look at this project.

 Aside from the many frameworks available for web services, there are even more 
web service providers. Nearly every company uses web services for integrating applica-
tions that are quite different, in terms of their functionality or their technology stack. 
That situation could be the result of companies merging or uncoordinated parallel 
development efforts in a single, typically large, company. In the vertical space, nearly 
all big financial and investment institutions use web services for seamless integration. 
Xignite  (http://preview.xignite.com/Default.aspx)  offers  a  variety  of  financial  web 
services. Software giants (such as SAP, Oracle, and Microsoft) also offer support for 
web services. In summary, web services-based integration is ubiquitous and, as one of 
the major integration enablers, it’s an important infrastructure element in the design 
of intelligent applications.

 At this point, you must have thought of the possible enhancements in your existing 
applications or you got a new idea for the next smashing startup! You checked that 
you have all the required data or that, at least, you can access the data. Now, let’s look 
at the kind of intelligence that we plan to inject in our applications and its relation-
ship to some terms that may be already familiar to you. 

1.5 Machine learning, data mining, and all that

We talk about “intelligence” throughout this book, but what exactly do we mean? Are 
we talking about the field of artificial intelligence? How about machine learning? Is it 
about data mining and soft computing? Academics of the respective fields may argue 
for years about the precise definition of what we’re about to present. From a practical 
perspective, most distinctions are benign and mainly a matter of context rather than 
substance. This book is a distillation of techniques that belong to all these areas. So, 
let’s discuss them.

6 http://www.w3.org/TR/soap12-part0/ - L1153

Licensed to Deborah Christiansen <pedbro@gmail.com>

Download at Boykma.Com