What applications can benefit from intelligence?

9

and a number of projects that are developed around it such as the Apache project Shin-
dig. The premise of OpenSocial is to build a common API base that will allow the devel-
opment of applications that interact with a large, and continuously growing, number of 
websites such as Engage , Friendster, hi5, Hyves, imeem, LinkedIn, MySpace, Ning, Ora-
cle, orkut, Plaxo, Salesforce , Six Apart, Tianji, Viadeo, and XING.

1.3.4 Wikis

Wikipedia shouldn’t require much introduction; you’ve probably visited that website 
already, or at least heard of it. It’s a wiki site that has been consistently in the top 10 
most visited websites. A wiki is a repository of knowledge that’s accessible online. Wikis 
are  used  by  social  communities  on  the  internet  and  by  corporations  internally  for 
knowledge-sharing purposes. 

 These sites are clearly content aggregators. In addition, a lot of these sites, due to 
the page creation workflow, have a built-in structure that annotates the content. In 
Wikipedia,  you  can  assign  an  article  to  a  category  and  link  articles  that  refer  to  the 
same  subject.  Wikis  are  a  promising  area  for  applying  the  techniques  of  this  book. 
For example, you could build or modify your wiki site so that it automatically catego-
rizes the pages that you write. The wiki pages could have an inlet, or another panel, 
of  recommended  terms  that  you  can  link  to—pages  on  a  wiki  are  supposed  to  be 
linked to each other whenever the link provides an explanation or additional infor-
mation on a term or topic. Finally, the natural linkage of the pages provides fertile 
ground  for  advanced  search  (chapter  2),  clustering  (chapter  4),  and  other  analyti- 
cal techniques.

1.3.5 Media-sharing sites

YouTube is the hallmark of the internet media-sharing sites, but other websites such as 
RapidShare  (http://www.rapidshare.com)  and  MegaUpload  (http://www.megau-
pload.com/) enjoy a high percentage of visitors. The unique feature of these sites is 
that most of their content is in binary format—video or audio files. In most cases, the 
size of the smallest unit of information is larger on these sites than on text-based site 
aggregators; the sheer volume of data to be processed, at the unit level, poses some of 
the greatest challenges in the context of gathering intelligence.

 In addition, two of the most difficult problems of intelligent applications (and also 
most interesting from a business perspective) are intimately related to the processing 
of binary information. These two problems are voice and pattern recognition. Compa-
nies  such  as  Clearspring  (http://www.clearspring.com/)  and  ScanScout  (http://
www.scanscout.com/), working together, enable advertisers to enhance the distribu-
tion of their brand and message to a broader audience. ScanScout provides advertis-
ers  with  intelligence  about  the  distribution  of,  and  engagement  with,  their  widgets 
across more than 25 sites, including MySpace, Facebook, Google, and Yahoo!

 The same pattern we described in the earlier sections can be found in these sites as 
well. We have aggregated content; we typically want to have the content categorized; 
and we want to have algorithms that can help us extract value from that content. We’d 

Licensed to Deborah Christiansen <pedbro@gmail.com>

Download at Boykma.Com