5.2.3

An overview of classifiers

173

more about this subject then you should look at Learning Bayesian Networks by Richard 
E. Neapolitan. 

The lifecycle of a classifier
No matter what type of classifier you choose for your application, the lifecycle of your 
classifier will fit in the general diagram of figure 5.3. There are three stages in the life-
cycle of a classifier: training, testing, and production.

  In  the  training  stage,  we  provide  the  classifier  with  data  points  for  which  we’ve 
already assigned an appropriate class. Every classifier contains a number of parame-
ters that must be determined before it’s used. The purpose of that stage is to deter-
mine the various parameters; we used a question mark inside a star to indicate that the 
primary goal is determining these parameters. In the validation stage, we want to vali-
date the classifier and ensure that before we roll it out to a production system, we’ve 
achieved a certain level of credibility for our results. We’ve used an E in a circle to 
indicate that the primary goal is determining the classification error, but the quality 
standard can and should be measured by various metrics (see section 5.6 for a discus-
sion on the credibility and cost of classification). The data that we use in the validation 
stage  (test  data)  must  be  different  than  the  data  that  we  used  in  the  training  stage 
(training data).

 The training and validation stages may be repeated many times before the classi-
fier transitions into the production stage, because there may be configuration param-
eters that aren’t identified by the training process but are given as input during the 
design of a classifier. This important point means that we can write software that wraps 
the classifier and its configuration parameters for the purpose of automatically testing 
and validating a large number of classifier designs. Even classifiers that are fundamen-
tally different in nature, such as naïve Bayes, neural network, and decision trees, could 
participate in the testing. We can either pick the best classifier, as determined by the 
quality metrics of the validation stages, or combine all the classifiers into what could 

Figure 5.3  The lifecycle of a 
classifier: training, testing, use 
in production

Licensed to Deborah Christiansen <pedbro@gmail.com>

Download at Boykma.Com