6

CHAPTER 1  What is the intelligent web?

1.3 What applications can benefit from intelligence?

1.3.1

The  ingredients  of  intelligence,  as  described  in  the  previous  section,  can  be  found 
across  a  wide  spectrum  of  applications,  from  social  networking  sites  to  specialized 
counterterrorism applications. In this section, we’ll describe examples from each cate-
gory. Our list is certainly not complete, but it’ll demonstrate that the techniques of 
this book can be widely useful, if not irreplaceable in certain cases.

Social networking sites
The websites that have marked the internet most prominently in the last few years are 
the social networking sites. These are web applications that provide their users with 
the ability to establish an online presence using nothing more than a browser and an 
internet connection. The users can share files (presentations, video files, audio files) 
with each other, comment on current events or other people’s pages, build their own 
social network, or join an existing one based on their interests. The two most-visited3
social networking sites are MySpace and Facebook, with hundreds of millions and tens 
of millions of registered users, respectively. 

  These  sites  are  content  aggregators  by  construction,  so  the  first  ingredient  for 
building  intelligence  is  readily  available.  The  second  ingredient  is  also  present  in 
those sites. For example, on MySpace, the content is categorized using top labels such 
as “Books,” “Movies,” “Schools,” “Jobs,” and so on that are clearly visible on the site 
(see figure 1.2). 

 In addition, these top-level categories are further refined by lower-level structures 
that  differentiate  content  related  to  “Classifieds”  from  content  related  to  “Polls”  or 

Figure 1.2  This snapshot shows the categories on the MySpace websites.

3 Based on traffic data captured by Alexa.com on December 2007.

Licensed to Deborah Christiansen <pedbro@gmail.com>

Download at Boykma.Com